\chapter{Mathematical Basics}

This chapter adapts the basics you've likely learned in elementary school to a
format that's essential for understanding computing. Computers are one of the
dumbest machines in the world: they don't do anything unless you tell them to,
and they only understand two numbers. If you think computers are smart and
magical, you'll quickly learn otherwise.

\section{Numeral Systems}

We have a good understanding how to read and write numbers intuitively since
they're ubiquitous in our day-to-day life. To understand the basics of computing
we'll have to come at it from a slightly different viewpoint. Again, computers
are dumb and we'll have to learn to speak their language. We'll start with an
overview of how we, the smart ones, deal with numbers.

\subsection{Decimal}

The number system we're all use to is decimal, or base 10. If we really break it
down, a number is just a sequence of digits where each digit is one of 10 values
(0 to 9). When we write a number that has more than one digit, we understand the
value of each digit based on where it is in the number. Let's really break it
down.

A number such as 321 can be broken down by looking at the value associated with
every digit. Starting at the rightmost digit, we associate that digit with the
number of 1s in the number. For the next digit, we associate with the number of
10s in the number. Finally, for the leftmost digit in this number, it's
associated with the number of 100s.

So, starting with the rightmost digit, with the association to the number of 1s,
we increase the meaning of the digit to the left by a factor of 10. Of course,
this is where the 10 in base 10 is from. We have 10 digits to choose from and
each digit in a number is associated with a factor of 10. Every digit represents
the number of things of 10 to the power of something (hence base 10). Using
exponents we can write the asssociated number, starting with the rightmost, as
$10^0$, then increase the exponent everytime we move left: $10^1$, $10^2$, and
so on.

This is so normal, you may not have really thought about this in all of the
detail. Get use to this type of thinking, you're going to have to explain
everything to a computer in this level of detail.

We can explicitly chart the values of each digit. In the first row is the value
of each of the digits and below of value is the digit in our number itself. The
chart for $321$ is as follows:

\begin{center}
  \begin{tabular}{r | r | r}
    $10^2$ & $10^1$ & $10^0$ \\
    \hline
         3 &      2 &      1 \\
  \end{tabular}
\end{center}

To get the value of the number, we multiple the value of the digit by the value
of the column it's in. This means we'd do the following calculation:

\begin{center}
  \begin{math}
    \begin{aligned}
&= 10^2 \times 3 + 10^1 \times 2 + 10^0 \times 1 \\
&= 300 + 20 + 1 \\
&= 321 \\
    \end{aligned}
  \end{math}
\end{center}

The notation, if we want to be explicit about the base of the digits, is to
write it in subscript. So, $321$ would be $(321)_{10}$. Since we all understand
decimal however, it's always omitted.

Now, this isn't very useful since we got back the exact same number we wrote.
Again, that's because we already understand decimal numbers. Unfortunately
computers aren't as gifted as us. We'll be using this technique to convert
numbers understood by computers into something we can understand.

\label{sec:numeral-system-binary}
\subsection{Binary}

\begin{center}
  \begin{tabular}{r | r | r}
    $2^2$ & $2^1$ & $2^0$ \\
    \hline
        1 &      0 &      1 \\
  \end{tabular}

  \vspace{1em}

  \begin{math}
    \begin{aligned}
&= 2^2 \times 1 + 2^1 \times 0 + 2^0 \times 1 \\
&= 4 + 0 + 1 \\
&= 5 \\
&= (101)_2 \\
    \end{aligned}
  \end{math}
\end{center}

\subsection{Hexadecimal}

Same as binary and octal, except instead of base 2 you use base 16.

\begin{tabular}{c c}
  \hline
  Value & Equivalent \\
  \hline
  10 & $(\text{A})_{16}$ \\
  11 & $(\text{B})_{16}$ \\
  12 & $(\text{C})_{16}$ \\
  13 & $(\text{D})_{16}$ \\
  14 & $(\text{E})_{16}$ \\
  15 & $(\text{F})_{16}$ \\
\end{tabular}

For instance: $95 = (5\text{F})_{16}$.

\section{Terminology}

Understand the following terminology: commutativity, and associativity.
